More US school-age children die from guns than on-duty US police or global military fatalities, study finds
health
Gun deaths of school-age children in the United States have increased at an alarming rate, with amongfrom, according to a new study by Florida Atlantic University's Schmidt College of Medicine. Indeed, spikes in gun deaths over the past decade amount to , researchers said. It is sobering that , there were  and about , whereas said Dr. Charles Hennekens, the study's senior author and an academic adviser at the medical college. The study, to be published in the American Journal of Medicine, found that children are being gunned down in staggering numbers, with the  The included (an ), and   (an ), according to the study.Of the deaths, , the study found. accounted for, though in recent years they've comprised just , .Among blacks, the annual average percent change of 9.5% for firearm-related mortality among 5 to 14-year-olds from 2013 to 2017 exceeded the 7.8% for overall deaths among 15 to 24-year-olds during the early years of the human immunodeficiency virus epidemic from 1987 to 1995, the study said. The research should have public policy implications, Hennekens said.We need more analytic studies on this, but in the meanwhile, we believe that trying to combat the epidemic of homicide due to firearms without addressing firearms is like combating the epidemic of lung cancer due to cigarettes without combating cigarettes, he said.To me, it's tragic that this is going on. Black children between  began to experience  in gun deaths in 2013, the study found. And from 2013 to 2017, in firearm deaths between blacks and whites . The study found these listed causes of death among the children: ; ; ; and 2% undetermined.In the ,  (830 deaths);  (1,912 deaths);  (3,545 deaths); and undetermined, 2.7% (177 deaths), according to the study.  For those , the cause of death was listed as  (1,121 deaths);  (10,688 deaths);  (20,247 deaths); and undetermined, 1.3% (422 deaths). The study used data from the Multiple Cause of Death files of the US National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS).The researchers found statistically significant increases in gun deaths beginning in 2009, with what they termed an  among . A , beginning in 2014, involved those in the . The  through , the most recent year of available US mortality data.The study said the epidemic poses clinical, public health and policy challenges. It singled out the 1996 Dickey Amendment as a major factor prohibiting analytic studies on the issue. In 1996, Congress removed $2.6 million -- the amount the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention spent on gun research the year prior -- from the CDC's budget and  named after late Republican Rep. Jay Dickey of Arkansas. Critics said the amendment ultimately led to the CDC halting gun violence research. found that death by gunshot was the second-highest cause of death in the United States in 2016 among children and adolescents, ages 1 to 19. The United States led the world in 2016 in the rate of firearm deaths in youth among countries with available data. The rate in the US was 36.5 times higher than in a dozen comparable high-income countries around the world; the rate of firearm deaths was five times as high compared with a sampling of low- to middle-income countries.
