What Apple is up against in the streaming-video world
business
We don't know exactly what  will debut during its big press event on Monday. A new streaming-video product? A revamped TV app and video storefront? What is clear is that the tech giant will be jumping into an already crowded — and growing -— streaming market.  is expected to roll out a streaming-video product at a press event on Monday — one that could come with a lineup of original programming from the likes of ,  and Steven Spielberg.This video product, whatever shape it takes, will be competing for viewers' time and money against some of the biggest entertainment companies in Hollywood, which are creating, promoting and launching their own services in 2019.There's  , which will demo its  at an investor day on April 11. The House of Mouse has one of the most vast (if not  most vast) content libraries in Hollywood: We're talking Star Wars, Marvel, Disney Animation, Disney live action, Pixar and now, thanks to its  earlier this week, even more content. Disney also owns a controlling stake of Hulu, which gives it an even bigger slice of the streaming pie. 's WarnerMedia, CNN's parent company, is also, with the beta version available in the fourth quarter this year. The company's offering will be broken down into : An entry level version that will be focused on movies, a premium version that will have original programming and blockbusters, and a third tier that will include both as well as a library of licensed content. Think Harry Potter, DC superheroes and HBO. is jumping into the streaming game too, but not until next year. Its service will host a wide array of content from the company's own library, including hit film franchises such as Jurassic World and The Fast and the Furious as well as hit TV shows like The Office.Then there's the granddaddy streaming product of them all:  .Netflix has dominated the streaming market for years, thanks to a content strategy that's a bit of . Reality shows like Tidying Up with Marie Kondo, dramas such as The Crown, Oscar winning films like Roma, and franchises that have huge fan bases like Stranger Things have all helped Netflix change the way we watch TV and movies. It's also helped Netflix grow to .Not to mention the countless other services — both big and small — from Amazon, CBS All Access and others.But Apple is Apple, after all, and its deep pockets, massive base of iPhone users, and tech expertise could help it find a way to succeed in the streaming-video world.And there's a good chance Apple could decide to work with other content companies rather than battle against them.The company's TV effort will certainly be ambitious,  Josef Adalian, west coast editor for New York Magazine's Vulture. It is certainly competing with Netflix (and Hulu and HBO and Amazon Prime) for both eyeballs and Hollywood talent. But there are no signs the company is looking to create an all-things-to-all-people platform such as Netflix. At least not yet.
